Analysis
The overview presented by covey on the seven habits in this part can be thought to provoke and challenge the mind beyond its limit. Covey has an experience of more than two decades in interaction with people who have achieved great milestones. It is evident that the successful people that covey has rubbed shoulders with in his lifetime have had an intense hunger for achieving personal efficiency and healthy relationships. In this part, correct application of principles comes out sharply as the critical ingredient to durable happiness and contentment. In this case, if principles are correctly utilized, habits and behavior are shaped to the direction of inside-out success and paradigm shift.

It can be drawn from this book that the human instincts firmly control habits. However, some human habits are circumstantial such that one’s response to changes in their life solely depends with the causative agents in the immediate environment. Covey feels that human beings are tabula rasa like a blank paper and that it’s up to them to put enough effort to write on the blank page which will control their lives and relationships. The lengthy process of writing on the blank page is what culminates in the evolution of human behavior and character. Character and personality according to covey are influenced differently, and the factor that plays a part in executing change to a person is the paradigm shift.

Paradigms are vital tools which act as lenses through which a person sees the rest of the world such that the paradigm ensures a deliberate sure channel of the quantum shift. It is a fact that one’s perspective of the world is profoundly shaped and influenced by their paradigm. This idea is further reinforced by Thomas Kuhn who states that people need to break from retrogressive traditions, outdated ways of reasoning and old paradigms and introduce fresh creations and new rational thinking. This consequently brings out a new understanding of the relationships between people and success. The overall idea is that the paradigm shift gyrates around the type of relations to others, attitude and the shaping of behavior.